en/README.md, before:

---
slug: /
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Introduction

Bianbu Linux is the BSP (Board Support Package) for the Spacemit Stone series chips, including the SDK (Software Development Kit). It consists of the supervisor program interface (OpenSBI), bootloader (U-Boot/UEFI), Linux kernel, root file system (containing various middleware and libraries), and examples. Its goal is to provide processor Linux support for customers and enable the development of drivers and applications.

## System Architecture

![](static/bianbu-linux-arch.png)

## Main components

The following are the components of Bianbu Linux:

- OpenSBI
- U-Boot
- Linux Kernel
- Buildroot
- onnxruntime (with Hardware Accelerated)
- ai-support: AI demo
- img-gpu-powervr: GPU DDK
- mesa3d
- QT 5.15 (with GPU enabled)
- k1x-vpu-firmware: Video Process Unit firmware
- k1x-vpu-test: Video Process Unit test program
- k1x-jpu: JPEG Process Unit API
- k1x-cam: CMOS Sensor and ISP API
- mpp: Media Process Platform
- FFmpeg (with Hardware Accelerated)
- GStreamer (with Hardware Accelerated)
- v2d-test: 2D Unit test program
- factorytest: factory test app

More is comming.

## Quick start guide

- [Image](image.md)
- [Source](source.md)
- [Tools](tools.md)

## Release notes

- [Release notes](release_notes/index.md)

Commit message:

bianbu-linux-docs:modify version v0.1
1. modify all of "bianbu linux" and "bianbu-linux" to "buildroot", except for those in log
2. modify all of "bianbu desktop" to "bianbu"

en/README.md, after:

---
slug: /
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Introduction

Linux SDK built on Buildroot, compatible with Spacemit K1/K3 chips. It consists of the supervisor program interface (OpenSBI), bootloader (U-Boot/UEFI), Linux kernel, root file system (containing various middleware and libraries), and examples. Its goal is to provide processor Linux support for customers and enable the development of drivers and applications.

## System Architecture

![](static/bianbu-linux-arch.png)

## Main components

The following are the components of SDK:

- OpenSBI
- U-Boot
- Linux Kernel
- Buildroot
- onnxruntime (with Hardware Accelerated)
- ai-support: AI demo
- img-gpu-powervr: GPU DDK
- mesa3d
- QT 5.15 (with GPU enabled)
- k1x-vpu-firmware: Video Process Unit firmware
- k1x-vpu-test: Video Process Unit test program
- k1x-jpu: JPEG Process Unit API
- k1x-cam: CMOS Sensor and ISP API
- mpp: Media Process Platform
- FFmpeg (with Hardware Accelerated)
- GStreamer (with Hardware Accelerated)
- v2d-test: 2D Unit test program
- factorytest: factory test app

More is comming.

## Quick start guide

- [Image](image.md)
- [Source](source.md)
- [Tools](tools.md)

## Release notes

- [Release notes](release_notes/index.md)
